# Chapter 2. Overview of EML modules and their use

## Module Overview Foreword

The following section briefly describes each EML module and how they are
logically designed in order to document ecological resources. Some of
the modules are dependent on others, while others may be used as
stand-alone descriptions. This section describes the modules using a
\"top down\" approach, starting from the top-level eml wrapper module,
followed by modules of increasing detail. However, there are modules
that may be used at many levels, such as eml-access. These modules are
described when it is appropriate.

## Root-level structure

### The eml module - A metadata container

The eml module is a wrapper container that allows the inclusion of any
metadata content in a single EML document. The eml module is used as a
container to hold structured descriptions of ecological resources. In
EML, the definition of a resource comes from the [*The Dublin Core
Metadata Initiative*](http://dublincore.org/documents/usageguide/),
which describes a general element set used to describe \"networked
digital resources\". The top-level structure of EML has been designed to
be compatible with the Dublin Core syntax. In general, dataset
resources, literature resources, software resources, and protocol
resources comprise the list of information that may be described in EML.
EML is largely designed to describe digital resources, however, it may
also be used to describe non-digital resources such as paper maps and
other non-digital media. [ *In EML, the definition of a \"Data Package\"
is the combination of both the data and metadata for a resource.*
]{.emphasis} So, data packages are built by using the \<eml\> wrapper,
which will include all of the metadata, and optionally the data (or
references to them). All EML packages must begin with the \<eml\> tag
and end with the \</eml\> tag.

The eml module may be extended to describe other resources by means of
its optional sub-field, \<additionalMetadata\>. This field is largely
reserved for the inclusion of metadata that may be highly discipline
specific and not covered in this version of EML, or it may be used to
internally extend fields within the EML standard.

### The eml-resource module - Base information for all resources

The eml-resource module contains general information that describes
dataset resources, literature resources, protocol resources, and
software resources. Each of the above four types of resources share a
common set of information, but also have information that is unique to
that particular resource type. Each resource type uses the eml-resource
module to document the information common to all resources, but then
extend eml-resource with modules that are specific to that particular
resource type. For instance, all resources have creators, titles, and
perhaps keywords, but only the dataset resource would have a \"data
table\" within it. Likewise, a literature resource may have an \"ISBN\"
number associated with it, whereas the other resource types would not.

The eml-resource module is exclusively used by other modules, and is
therefore not a stand-alone module.

## Top-level resources

The following four modules are used to describe separate resources:
datasets, literature, software, and protocols. However, note that the
dataset module makes use of the other top-level modules by importing
them at different levels. For instance, a dataset may have been produced
using a particular protocol, and that protocol may come from a protocol
document in a library of protocols. Likewise, citations are used
throughout the top-level resource modules by importing the literature
module.

### The eml-dataset module - Dataset specific information

The eml-dataset module contains general information that describes
dataset resources. It is intended to provide overview information about
the dataset: broad information such as the title, abstract, keywords,
contacts, maintenance history, purpose, and distribution of the data
themselves. The eml-dataset module also imports many other modules that
are used to describe the dataset in fine detail. Specifically, it uses
the eml-methods module to describe methodology used in collecting or
processing the dataset, the eml-project module to describe the
overarching research context and experimental design, the eml-access
module to define access control rules for the data and metadata, and the
eml-entity module to provide detailed information about the logical
structure of the dataset. A dataset can be (and often is) composed of a
series of data entities (tables) that are linked together by particular
integrity constraints.

The eml-dataset module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows a dataset to be described once, and
then used as a reference in other locations within the EML document via
its ID.

### The eml-literature module - Citation specific information

The eml-literature module contains information that describes literature
resources. It is intended to provide overview information about the
literature citation, including title, abstract, keywords, and contacts.
Citation types follow the conventions laid out by
[EndNote](http://www.endnote.com), and there is an attempt to represent
a compatible subset of the EndNote citation types. These citation types
include: article, book, chapter, edited book, manuscript, report,
thesis, conference proceedings, personal communication, map, generic,
audio visual, and presentation. The \"generic\" citation type would be
used when one of the other types will not work.

The eml-literature module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows a citation to be described once, and
then used as a reference in other locations within the EML document via
its ID.

### The eml-software module - Software specific information

The eml-software module contains general information that describes
software resources. This module is intended to fully document software
that is needed in order to view a resource (such as a dataset) or to
process a dataset. The software module is also imported into the
eml-methods module in order to document what software was used to
process or perform quality control procedures on a dataset.

The eml-software module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows a software resource to be described
once, and then used as a reference in other locations within the EML
document via its ID.

### The eml-protocol module - Research protocol specific information

The EML Protocol Module is used to define abstract, prescriptive
procedures for generating or processing data. Conceptually, a protocol
is a standardized method.

Eml-protocol resembles eml-methods; however, eml-methods is descriptive
(often written in the declarative mood: \"I took five subsamples\...\")
whereas eml-protocol is prescriptive (often written in the imperative
mood: \"Take five subsamples\...\"). A protocol may have versions,
whereas methods (as used in eml-methods) should not.

## Supporting Modules - Adding detail to top-level resources

The following six modules are used to qualify the resources being
described in more detail. They are used to describe access control
rules, distribution of the metadata and data themselves, parties
associated with the resource, the geographic, temporal, and taxonomic
extents of the resource, the overall research context of the resource,
and detailed methodology used for creating the resource. Some of these
modules are imported directly into the top-level resource modules, often
in many locations in order to limit the scope of the description. For
instance, the eml-coverage module may be used for a particular column of
a dataset, rather than the entire dataset as a whole.

### The eml-access module - Access control rules for resources

The eml-access module describes the level of access that is to be
allowed or denied to a resource for a particular user or group of users,
and can be described independently for metadata and data. The eml-access
module uses a reference to a particular authentication system to
determine the set of principals (users or groups) that can be specified
in the access rules. The special principal \'public\' can be used to
indicate that any user or group has access permission, thereby making it
easier to specify that anonymous access is allowed.

There are two mechanisms for including access control via the eml-access
module:

1.  The top-level \"eml\" element may have an optional \<access\>
    element that is used to establish the default access control for the
    entire EML package. If this access element is omitted from the
    document, then the package submitter should be given full access to
    the package but all other users should be denied all access. To
    allow the package to be publicly viewable, the EML author must
    explicitly include a rule stating so. Barring the existence of a
    distribution-level \<access\> element (see below), access to data
    entities will be controlled by the package-level \<access\> element
    in the \<eml\> element.

2.  Exceptions for particular entity-level components of the package can
    be controlled at a finer grain by using an access description in
    that entity\'s physical/distribution tree. When access control rules
    are specified at this level, they apply only to the data in the
    parent distribution element, and not to the metadata. Thus, it will
    control access to the content of the \<inline\> element, as well as
    resources that are referenced by the \<online/url\> and
    \<online/connection\> paths. These exceptions to access for
    particular data resources are applied after the default access rules
    at the package-level have been applied, so they effectively override
    the default rules when they overlap.

In previous versions of EML access rules for entity-level distribution
were contained in \<additionalMetadata\> sections and referenced via the
\<describes\> tag. Although in theory these could have referenced any
node, in application such node-level access control is problematic.
Since the most common uses of access control rules were to limit access
to specific data entities, the access tree has been placed there
explicitly in EML 2.1.0.

Access is specified with a choice of child elements, either \<allow\> or
\<deny\>. Within these rules, values can be assigned for each
\<principal\> using the \<permission\> element. Users given \"read\"
permission can view the resource; \"write\" allows changes to the
resource excluding changes to the access rules; \"changePermission\"
includes \"write\" plus the changing of access rules. Users allowed
\"all\" permissions; may do all of the above. Access to data and
metadata is affected by the order attribute of the \<access\> element.
It is possible for a deny rule to override an allow rule, and vice
versa. In the case where the order attribute is set to \"allowFirst\",
and there are rules similar to the following (with non-critical sections
deleted):

```xml
      <deny>
        <principal>public</principal>
        <permission>read</permission>
      </deny>
      <allow>
        <principal>uid=alice,o=NASA,dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org</principal>
        <permission>read</permission>
      </allow>
```

the principal \"uid=alice \...\" will be denied access, because it is a
member of the special \"public\" principal, and the deny rule is
processed second. For this allow rule to truly allow access to that
principal, the order attribute should be set to \"denyFirst\", and the
allow rule will override the deny rule when it is processed second.

An example is given below, with non-critical sections deleted:
```xml
      <eml>
          <access
              authSystem="ldap://ldap.ecoinformatics.org:389/dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org"
              order="allowFirst">
            <allow>
              <principal>uid=alice,o=NASA,dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org</principal>
              <permission>read</permission>
              <permission>write</permission>
            <allow>
          </access>
          <dataset>
          ...
          ...
          <dataTable id="entity123">
          ...
            <physical>
            ...
              <distribution>
              ...
                <access id="access123"
                authSystem="ldap://ldap.ecoinformatics.org:389/dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org"
                order="allowFirst">
                  <deny>
                    <principal>uid=alice,o=NASA,dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org</principal>
                    <permission>write</permission>
                </deny>
              </access>
             </distribution>
           </physical>
          </dataTable>
          <dataTable id="entity234">
            ...
            <physical>
            ...
              <distribution>
                ...
                <access>
                  <references>access123</references>
                </access>
              </distribution>
            </physical>
          </dataTable>
          ...    
        </dataset>
      <eml>
```

In this example, the overall default access is to allow the user=alice
(but no one else) to read and write all metadata and data. However,
under \"entity123\" and \"entity234\", there is an additional rule
saying that user=alice does not have write permission. The net effect is
that Alice can read and make changes to the metadata, but cannot make
changes to the two data entities. In addition, Alice cannot change these
access rules; although the submitter can.

This example also shows how the eml-access module, like other modules,
may be \"referenced\" via the \<references\> tag. This allows an access
control document to be described once, and then used as a reference in
other locations within the EML document via its ID.

In summary, access rules can be applied in two places in an eml
document. Default access rules are established in the top \<access\>
element for the main eml document (e.g., \"/eml/access\"). These default
rules can be overridden for particular data entities by adding
additional \<access\> elements in the physical/distribution trees of
those entities.

### The eml-physical module - Physical file format

The eml-physical module describes the external and internal physical
characteristics of a data object as well as the information required for
its distribution. Examples of the external physical characteristics of a
data object would be the filename, size, compression, encoding methods,
and authentication of a file or byte stream. Internal physical
characteristics describe the format of the data object being described.
Both named binary or otherwise proprietary formats can be cited (e.g.,
Microsoft Access 2000), or text formats can be precisely described
(e.g., ASCII text delimited with commas). For these text formats, it
also includes the information needed to parse the data object to extract
the entity and its attributes from the data object. Distribution
information describes how to retrieve the data object. The retrieval
information can be either online (e.g., a URL or other connection
information) or offline (e.g., a data object residing on an archival
tape).

The eml-physical module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows a physical document to be described
once, and then used as a reference in other locations within the EML
document via its ID.

### The eml-party module - People and organization information

The eml-party module describes a responsible party and is typically used
to name the creator of a resource or metadata document. A responsible
party may be an individual person, an organization or a named position
within an organization. The eml-party module contains detailed contact
information. It is used throughout the other EML modules where detailed
contact information is needed.

The eml-party module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via the
\<references\> tag. This allows a party to be described once, and then
used as a reference in other locations within the EML document via its
ID.

### The eml-coverage module - Geographic, temporal, and taxonomic extents of resources

The eml-coverage module contains fields for describing the coverage of a
resource in terms of time, space, and taxonomy. These coverages
(temporal, spatial, and taxonomic) represent the extent of applicability
of the resource in those domains. The Geographic coverage section allows
for 2 means of expressing coverage on the surface of the earth: 1) via a
set of bounding coordinates that define the North, South, East and West
points in a rectangular area, optionally including a bounding altitude,
and 2) using a G-Ring polygon definition, where an irregularly shaped
area may be defined using a ordered list of latitude/longitude
coordinates. A G-Ring may also include an \"inner G-Ring\" that defines
one or more \"cut-outs\" in the area, i.e. the donut hole concept.

The temporal coverage section allows for the definition of either a
single date or time, or a range of dates or times. These may be
expressed as a calendar date according to the ISO 8601 Date and Time
Specification, or by using an alternate time scale, such as the geologic
time scale. Currently, EML does not have specific fields to indicate
that a data resource may be \"ongoing.\" Two examples are data tables
that are planned to be appended in the future, or resources with complex
connection definitions (such as to a database) which may return data in
real time. It is important that EML be able to handle data from both the
\"producer\" and \"consumer\" points of view, although currently the
temporal coverage modules are designed for the latter. There is no
universally acceptable recommendation for describing \"ongoing\" data
within EML. Some groups have chosen to use the \<alternateTimeScale\>
node for the end date, with a value of \"ongoing,\" although this
practice is not endorsed by the EML authors. A better solution could be
to use very general content for the endDate (such as only the current
year) so that the data are accurately described, and searches return
datasets as expected. A future version of EML will accommodate such data
types with coverage elements specific to their needs.

The taxonomic coverage section allows for detailed description of the
taxonomic extent of the dataset or resource. The taxonomic
classification consists of a recursive set of taxon rank names, their
values, and their common names. This construct allows for a taxonomic
hierarchy to be built to show the level of identification (e.g. Rank
Name = Kingdom, Rank Value = Animalia, Common Name = Animals, and so on
down the hierarchy.) The taxonomic coverage module also allows for the
definition of the classification system in cases where alternative
systems are used.

The eml-coverage module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows the coverage extent to be described
once, and then used as a reference in other locations within the EML
document via its ID.

### The eml-project module - Research context information for resources

The eml-project module describes the research context in which the
dataset was created, including descriptions of over-all motivations and
goals, funding, personnel, description of the study area etc. This is
also the module to describe the design of the project: the scientific
questions being asked, the architecture of the design, etc. This module
is used to place the dataset that is being documented into its larger
research context.

The eml-project module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows a research project to be described
once, and then used as a reference in other locations within the EML
document via its ID.

### The eml-methods module - Methodological information for resources

The eml-methods module describes the methods followed in the creation of
the dataset, including description of field, laboratory and processing
steps, sampling methods and units, quality control procedures. The
eml-methods module is used to describe the [*actual*]{.emphasis}
procedures that are used in the creation or the subsequent processing of
a dataset. Likewise, eml-methods is used to describe processes that have
been used to define / improve the quality of a data file, or to identify
potential problems with the data file. Note that the eml-protocol module
is intended to be used to document a [*prescribed*]{.emphasis}
procedure, whereas the eml-method module is used to describe procedures
that [*were actually performed*]{.emphasis}. The distinction is that the
use of the term \"protocol\" is used in the \"prescriptive\" sense, and
the term \"method\" is used in the \"descriptive\" sense. This
distinction allows managers to build a protocol library of well-known,
established protocols (procedures), but also document what procedure was
truly performed in relation to the established protocol. The method may
have diverged from the protocol purposefully, or perhaps incidentally,
but the procedural lineage is still preserved and understandable.

## Data organization - Modules describing dataset structures

The following three modules are used to document the logical layout of a
dataset. Many datasets are comprised of multiple entities (e.g. a series
of tabular data files, or a set of GIS features, or a number of tables
in a relational database). Each entity within a dataset may contain one
or more attributes (e.g. multiple columns in a data file, multiple
attributes of a GIS feature, or multiple columns of a database table).
Lastly, there may be both simple or complex relationships among the
entities within a dataset. The relationships, or the constraints that
are to be enforced in the dataset, are described using the
eml-constraint module. All entities share a common set of information
(described using eml-entity), but some discipline specific entities have
characteristics that are unique to that entity type. Therefore, the
eml-entity module is extended for each of these types (dataTable,
spatialRaster, spatialVector, etc\...) which are described in the next
section.

### The eml-entity module - Entity level information within datasets

The eml-entity module defines the logical characteristics of each entity
in the dataset. Entities are usually tables of data (eml-dataTable).
Data tables may be ascii text files, relational database tables,
spreadsheets or other type of tabular data with a fixed logical
structure. Related to data tables are views (eml-view) and stored
procedures (eml-storedProcedure). Views and stored procedures are
produced by an RDBMS or related system. Other types of data such as:
raster (eml-spatialRaster), vector (eml-spatialVector) or
spatialReference image data are also data entities. An otherEntity
element would be used to describe types of entities that are not
described by any other entity type.

The eml-entity module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via the
\<references\> tag. This allows an entity document to be described once,
and then used as a reference in other locations within the EML document
via its ID.

### The eml-attribute module - Attribute level information within dataset entities

The eml-attribute module describes all attributes (variables) in a data
entity: dataTable, spatialRaster, spatialVector, storedProcedure, view
or otherEntity. The description includes the name and definition of each
attribute, its domain, definitions of coded values, and other pertinent
information. Two structures exist in this module: 1. attribute is used
to define a single attribute; 2. attributeList is used to define a list
of attributes that go together in some logical way.

The eml-attribute module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows an attribute document to be
described once, and then used as a reference in other locations within
the EML document via its ID.

#### Philosophy of Attribute Units

The concept of \"unit\" represents one of the most fundamental
categories of metadata. The classic example of data entropy is the case
in which a reported numeric value loses meaning due to lack of
associated units. Much of Ecology is driven by measurement, and most
measurements are inherently comparative. Good data description requires
a representation of the basis for comparison, i.e., the unit. In
modeling the attribute element, the authors of EML drew inspiration from
the [NIST Reference on Constants, Units, and
Uncertainty](http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Units/introduction.html). This
document defines a unit as \"a particular physical quantity, defined and
adopted by convention, with which other particular quantities of the
same kind are compared to express their value.\" The authors of the EML
2.0 specification (hereafter \"the authors\") decided to make the unit
element required, wherever possible.

Units may also be one of the most problematic categories of metadata.
For instance, there are many candidate attributes that clearly have no
units, such as named places and letter grades. There are other candidate
attributes for which units are difficult to identify, despite some
suspicion that they should exist (e.g. pH, dates, times). In still other
cases, units may be meaningful, but apparently absent due to dimensional
analysis (e.g. grams of carbon per gram of soil). The relationship
between units and dimensions likewise is not completely clear.

The authors decided to sharpen the model of attribute by nesting unit
under measurementScale. Measurement Scale is a data typology, borrowed
from Statistics, that was introduced in the 1940\'s. Under the adopted
model, attributes are classified as nominal, ordinal, interval, and
ratio. Though widely criticized, this classification is well-known and
provides at least first-order utility in EML. For example, nesting unit
under measurementScale allows EML to prevent its meaningless inclusion
for categorical data \-- an approach judged superior to making unit
universally required or universally optional.

The sharpening of the attribute model allowed the elimination of the
unit type \"undefined\" from the standard unit dictionary (see
eml-unitDictionary.xml). It seemed self-defeating to require the unit
element exactly where appropriate, yet still allow its content to be
undefined. An attribute that requires a unit definition is malformed
until one is provided. The unit type \"dimensionless\" is preserved,
however. In EML 2.0, it is synonymous with \"unitless\" and represents
the case in which units cannot be associated with an attribute for some
reason, despite the proper classification of that attribute as interval
or ratio. Dimensionless may itself be an anomaly arising from the
limitations of the adopted measurement scale typology.

Closely related to the concept of unit is the concept of attribute
domain. The authors decided that a well-formed description of an
attribute must include some indication of the set of possible values for
that attribute. The set of possible values is useful, perhaps necessary,
for interpreting any particular observed value. While universally
required, attribute domain has different forms, depending on the
associated measurement scale.

The element storageType has an obvious relationship to domain. It gives
some indication of the range of possible values of an attribute, and
also gives some (potentially critical) operability information about the
way the attribute is represented or construed in the local storage
system. The storageType element seems to fall in a gray area between the
logical and physical aspects of stored data. Neither comfortable with
eliminating it nor with making it required, the authors left it
available but optional under attribute. In addition, it is repeatable so
that different storage types can be provided for various systems (e.g.,
different databases might use different types for columns, even though
the domain of the attribute is the same regardless of which database is
used).

Attributes representing dates, times, or combinations thereof (hereafter
\"dateTime\") were the most difficult to model in EML. Is dateTime of
type interval or ordinal? Does it have units or not? Strong cases can be
made on each side of the issue. The confusion may reflect the
limitations of the measurement scale typology. The final resolution of
the dateTime model is probably somewhat arbitrary. There was clearly a
need, however, to allow for the interoperability of dateTime formats.
EML 2.0 tries to provide an unambiguous mechanism for describing the
format of dateTime values by providing a separate category for date and
time values. This \"dateTime\" measurement scale allows users to
explicitly label attributes that contain Gregorian date and time values,
and allows them to provide the information needed to parse these values
into their appropriate components (e.g., days, months, years)./

### The eml-constraint module - Relationships among and within dataset entities

The eml-constraint schema defines the integrity constraints between
entities (e.g., data tables) as they would be maintained in a relational
management system. These constraints include primary key constraints,
foreign key constraints, unique key constraints, check constraints, and
not null constraints, among potential others.

## Entity types - Detailed information for discipline specific entities

The following six modules are used to describe a number of common types
of entities found in datasets. Each entity type uses the eml-entity
module elements as it\'s base set of elements, but then extends the base
with entity-specific elements. Note that the eml-spatialReference module
is not an entity type, but is rather a common set of elements used to
describe spatial reference systems in both eml-spatialRaster and
eml-spatialVector. It is described here in relation to those two
modules.

### The eml-dataTable module - Logical information about data table entities

The eml-dataTable module is used to describe the logical characteristics
of each tabular set of information in a dataset. A series of
comma-separated text files may be considered a dataset, and each file
would subsequently be considered a dataTable entity within the dataset.
Since the eml-dataTable module extends the eml-entity module, it uses
all of the common entity elements to describe the table, along with a
few elements specific to just data table entities. The eml-dataTable
module allows for the description of each attribute
(column/field/variable) within the data table through the use of the
eml-attribute module. Likewise, there are fields used to describe the
physical distribution of the data table, its overall coverage, the
methodology used in creating the data, and other logical structure
information such as its orientation, case sensitivity, etc.

### The eml-spatialRaster module - Logical information about regularly gridded geospatial image data

The eml-spatialRaster module allows for the description of entities
composed of rectangular grids of data values that are usually
georeferenced to a portion of the earth\'s surface. Specific attributes
of a spatial raster can be documented here including the spatial
organization of the raster cells, the cell data values, and if derived
via imaging sensors, characteristics about the image and its individual
bands.

### The eml-spatialVector module - Logical information about non-gridded geospatial image data

The eml-spatialVector module allows for the description of spatial
objects in a GIS system that are not defined in a regularly gridded
pattern. These geometries include points and vectors and the
relationships among them. Specific attributes of a spatial vector can be
documented here including the vector\'s geometry type, count and
topology level.

### Schema for validating spatial referencing descriptions

This module defines both projected and unprojected coordinate systems
for referencing the spatial coordinates of a dataset to the earth. The
schema is based on that used by Environmental Systems Research Inc
(ESRI) for its .prj file format. EML provides a library of pre-defined
coordinate systems that may be referred to by name in the
horizCoordSysName element. A custom projection may be defined using this
schema for any projection that does not appear in this dictionary.

### The eml-storedProcedure module - Data tables resulting from procedures stored in a database

The storedProcedure module is meant to capture information on procedures
that produce data output in the form of a data table. In an RDBMS one
can code complex queries and transactions into stored procedures and
then invoke them directly from front-end applications. It allows the
optional description of any parameters that are expected to be passed to
the procedure when it is called.

### The eml-view module - Data tables resulting from a database query

The eml-view module describes a view from a database management system.
A view is a query statement that is stored as a database object and
executed each time the view is called.

## Utility modules - Metadata documentation enhancements

The following modules are used to highlight the information being
documented in each of the above modules where prose may be needed to
convey the critical metadata. The eml-text module provides a number of
text-based constructs to enhance a document (including sections,
paragraphs, lists, subscript, superscript, emphasis, etc.)

### The eml-text module - Text field formatting

The eml-text module is a wrapper container that allows general text
descriptions to be used within the various modules of eml. It can
include either structured or unstructured text blocks. It isn\'t really
appropriate to use this module outside of the context of a parent
module, because the parent module determines the appropriate context to
which this text description applies. The eml-text module allows one to
provide structure to a text description in order to convey concepts such
as sections (paragraphs), hierarchy (ordered and unordered lists),
emphasis (bold, superscript, subscript) etc. The structured elements can
be specified using a subset of [DocBook](http://www.docbook.org) so the
predefined DocBook stylesheets can be used to style EML fields that
implement this module, or alternatively can be specified using Markdown
text blocks. Combinations of plain text, docbook sections, and markdown
sections can be interleaved in any order, but most people will likely
find the markdown syntax the easiest to use.

### The eml-semantics module - Semantic annotations for formalized statements about EML components
The eml-semantics module defines types and elements for
annotating other structures within EML with semantically-precise
statements from various controlled vocabularies.  This is
accomplished by associating the global URI for a property and
value with elements from EML, such as an attribute, an entity,
or a dataset. It is used throughout the other EML modules where
detailed semantic information is needed. For example, given an
EML attribute named "tmpair", one might want to indicate
semantically that the attribute is measuring the property
"Temperature" from a sample of the entity "Air", where both of
those terms are defined precisely in controlled vocabularies.
The eml-semantics module defines an 'annotation' element and
associated type that can be used within EML resources (dataset,
software, etc.), EML Entities (dataTable, spatialRaster,
spatialVector, otherEntity), and EML Attributes.  They can also
be applied within the EML additionalMetadata field to label
arbitrary structures within EML, in which case the subject of
the annotation is the element listed in the describes element
within the additionalMetadata field.

## Internationalization - Metadata in multiple languages

EML supports internationalization using the i18nNonEmptyStringType.
Fields defined as this type include:

-   Title
-   Keyword
-   Contact information (e.g. names, organizations, addresses)

TextType fields also support language translations. These fields
include:

-   Abstract
-   Methods
-   Protocol

**Example 2.1. Internationalization techniques**

Core metadata should be provided in English. The core elements can be
augmented with translations in a native language. Detailed metadata can
be provided in the native language as declared using the xml:lang
attribute. Authors can opt to include English translations of this
detailed metadata as they see fit.

The following example metadata document is provided primarily in
Portuguese but includes English translations of core metadata fields.
The xml:lang=\"pt\_BR\" attribute at the root of the EML document
indicates that, unless otherwise specified, the content of the document
is supplied in Portuguese (Brazil). The xml:lang=\"en\_US\" attributes
on child elements denote that the content of that element is provided in
English. Core metadata (i.e. title) is provided in English, supplemented
with a Portuguese translation using the value tag with an xml:lang
attribute. Note that child elements can override the root language
declaration of the document as well as the language declaration of their
containing elements. The abstract element is primarily given in
Portuguese (as inherited from the root language declaration), with an
English translation.

Many EML fields are repeatable (i.e. keyword) so that multiple values
can be provided for the same concept. Translations for these fields
should be included as nested value tags to indicate that they are
equivalent concepts expressed in different languages rather than
entirely different concepts.

```xml
    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <eml:eml
        packageId="eml.1.1" system="knb"
        xml:lang="pt_BR"
        xmlns:eml="eml://ecoinformatics.org/eml-2.2.0"
        xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
        xsi:schemaLocation="eml://ecoinformatics.org/eml-2.2.0 eml.xsd">

      <dataset id="ds.1">

        <!-- English title with Portuguese translation -->    
        <title xml:lang="en-US">
            Sample Dataset Description
            <value xml:lang="pt-BR">Exemplo Descrição Dataset</value>
        </title>
        ...
        <!-- Portuguese abstract with English translation -->    
        <abstract>
            <para>
                Neste exemplo, a tradução em Inglês é secundário
                <value xml:lang="">In this example, the English translation is secondary</value>
            </para>
        </abstract>
        ...
        <!-- two keywords, each with an equivalent translation -->    
        <keywordSet>
            <keyword keywordType="theme">
                árvore
                <value xml:lang="en-US">tree</value>
            </keyword>
            <keyword keywordType="theme">
                água
                <value xml:lang="en-US">water</value>
            </keyword>
        </keywordSet>
        ...
      </dataset>
    </eml:eml>
```
