## Discovery and Interpretation Modules

The following six modules are used to qualify the resources being
described in more detail. They are used to describe access control
rules, distribution of the metadata and data themselves, parties
associated with the resource, the geographic, temporal, and taxonomic
extents of the resource, the overall research context of the resource,
and detailed methodology used for creating the resource. Some of these
modules are imported directly into the top-level resource modules, often
in many locations in order to limit the scope of the description. For
instance, the eml-coverage module may be used for a particular column of
a dataset, rather than the entire dataset as a whole.

### The eml-access module - Access control rules for resources

Links:

- [Module Diagram](./images/eml-access.png)
- [Interactive Module Documentation](./schema/eml-access_xsd.html)

The eml-access module describes the level of access that is to be
allowed or denied to a resource for a particular user or group of users,
and can be described independently for metadata and data. The eml-access
module uses a reference to a particular authentication system to
determine the set of principals (users or groups) that can be specified
in the access rules. The special principal \'public\' can be used to
indicate that any user or group has access permission, thereby making it
easier to specify that anonymous access is allowed.

There are two mechanisms for including access control via the eml-access
module:

1.  The top-level \"eml\" element may have an optional \<access\>
    element that is used to establish the default access control for the
    entire EML package. If this access element is omitted from the
    document, then the package submitter should be given full access to
    the package but all other users should be denied all access. To
    allow the package to be publicly viewable, the EML author must
    explicitly include a rule stating so. Barring the existence of a
    distribution-level \<access\> element (see below), access to data
    entities will be controlled by the package-level \<access\> element
    in the \<eml\> element.

2.  Exceptions for particular entity-level components of the package can
    be controlled at a finer grain by using an access description in
    that entity\'s physical/distribution tree. When access control rules
    are specified at this level, they apply only to the data in the
    parent distribution element, and not to the metadata. Thus, it will
    control access to the content of the \<inline\> element, as well as
    resources that are referenced by the \<online/url\> and
    \<online/connection\> paths. These exceptions to access for
    particular data resources are applied after the default access rules
    at the package-level have been applied, so they effectively override
    the default rules when they overlap.

In previous versions of EML access rules for entity-level distribution
were contained in \<additionalMetadata\> sections and referenced via the
\<describes\> tag. Although in theory these could have referenced any
node, in application such node-level access control is problematic.
Since the most common uses of access control rules were to limit access
to specific data entities, the access tree has been placed there
explicitly in EML 2.1.0.

Access is specified with a choice of child elements, either \<allow\> or
\<deny\>. Within these rules, values can be assigned for each
\<principal\> using the \<permission\> element. Users given \"read\"
permission can view the resource; \"write\" allows changes to the
resource excluding changes to the access rules; \"changePermission\"
includes \"write\" plus the changing of access rules. Users allowed
\"all\" permissions; may do all of the above. Access to data and
metadata is affected by the order attribute of the \<access\> element.
It is possible for a deny rule to override an allow rule, and vice
versa. In the case where the order attribute is set to \"allowFirst\",
and there are rules similar to the following (with non-critical sections
deleted):

```xml
      <deny>
        <principal>public</principal>
        <permission>read</permission>
      </deny>
      <allow>
        <principal>uid=alice,o=NASA,dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org</principal>
        <permission>read</permission>
      </allow>
```

the principal \"uid=alice \...\" will be denied access, because it is a
member of the special \"public\" principal, and the deny rule is
processed second. For this allow rule to truly allow access to that
principal, the order attribute should be set to \"denyFirst\", and the
allow rule will override the deny rule when it is processed second.

An example is given below, with non-critical sections deleted:
```xml
      <eml>
          <access
              authSystem="ldap://ldap.ecoinformatics.org:389/dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org"
              order="allowFirst">
            <allow>
              <principal>uid=alice,o=NASA,dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org</principal>
              <permission>read</permission>
              <permission>write</permission>
            <allow>
          </access>
          <dataset>
          ...
          ...
          <dataTable id="entity123">
          ...
            <physical>
            ...
              <distribution>
              ...
                <access id="access123"
                authSystem="ldap://ldap.ecoinformatics.org:389/dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org"
                order="allowFirst">
                  <deny>
                    <principal>uid=alice,o=NASA,dc=ecoinformatics,dc=org</principal>
                    <permission>write</permission>
                </deny>
              </access>
             </distribution>
           </physical>
          </dataTable>
          <dataTable id="entity234">
            ...
            <physical>
            ...
              <distribution>
                ...
                <access>
                  <references>access123</references>
                </access>
              </distribution>
            </physical>
          </dataTable>
          ...    
        </dataset>
      <eml>
```

In this example, the overall default access is to allow the user=alice
(but no one else) to read and write all metadata and data. However,
under \"entity123\" and \"entity234\", there is an additional rule
saying that user=alice does not have write permission. The net effect is
that Alice can read and make changes to the metadata, but cannot make
changes to the two data entities. In addition, Alice cannot change these
access rules; although the submitter can.

This example also shows how the eml-access module, like other modules,
may be \"referenced\" via the \<references\> tag. This allows an access
control document to be described once, and then used as a reference in
other locations within the EML document via its ID.

In summary, access rules can be applied in two places in an eml
document. Default access rules are established in the top \<access\>
element for the main eml document (e.g., \"/eml/access\"). These default
rules can be overridden for particular data entities by adding
additional \<access\> elements in the physical/distribution trees of
those entities.

### The eml-physical module - Physical file format

Links:

- [Module Diagram](./images/eml-physical.png)
- [Interactive Module Documentation](./schema/eml-physical_xsd.html)

The eml-physical module describes the external and internal physical
characteristics of a data object as well as the information required for
its distribution. Examples of the external physical characteristics of a
data object would be the filename, size, compression, encoding methods,
and authentication of a file or byte stream. Internal physical
characteristics describe the format of the data object being described.
Both named binary or otherwise proprietary formats can be cited (e.g.,
Microsoft Access 2000), or text formats can be precisely described
(e.g., ASCII text delimited with commas). For these text formats, it
also includes the information needed to parse the data object to extract
the entity and its attributes from the data object. Distribution
information describes how to retrieve the data object. The retrieval
information can be either online (e.g., a URL or other connection
information) or offline (e.g., a data object residing on an archival
tape).

The eml-physical module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows a physical document to be described
once, and then used as a reference in other locations within the EML
document via its ID.

### The eml-party module - People and organization information

Links:

- [Module Diagram](./images/eml-party.png)
- [Interactive Module Documentation](./schema/eml-party_xsd.html)

The eml-party module describes a responsible party and is typically used
to name the creator of a resource or metadata document. A responsible
party may be an individual person, an organization or a named position
within an organization. The eml-party module contains detailed contact
information. It is used throughout the other EML modules where detailed
contact information is needed.

The eml-party module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via the
\<references\> tag. This allows a party to be described once, and then
used as a reference in other locations within the EML document via its
ID.

### The eml-coverage module - Geographic, temporal, and taxonomic extents of resources

Links:

- [Module Diagram](./images/eml-coverage.png)
- [Interactive Module Documentation](./schema/eml-coverage_xsd.html)

The eml-coverage module contains fields for describing the coverage of a
resource in terms of time, space, and taxonomy. These coverages
(temporal, spatial, and taxonomic) represent the extent of applicability
of the resource in those domains. The Geographic coverage section allows
for 2 means of expressing coverage on the surface of the earth: 1) via a
set of bounding coordinates that define the North, South, East and West
points in a rectangular area, optionally including a bounding altitude,
and 2) using a G-Ring polygon definition, where an irregularly shaped
area may be defined using a ordered list of latitude/longitude
coordinates. A G-Ring may also include an \"inner G-Ring\" that defines
one or more \"cut-outs\" in the area, i.e. the donut hole concept.

The temporal coverage section allows for the definition of either a
single date or time, or a range of dates or times. These may be
expressed as a calendar date according to the ISO 8601 Date and Time
Specification, or by using an alternate time scale, such as the geologic
time scale. Currently, EML does not have specific fields to indicate
that a data resource may be \"ongoing.\" Two examples are data tables
that are planned to be appended in the future, or resources with complex
connection definitions (such as to a database) which may return data in
real time. It is important that EML be able to handle data from both the
\"producer\" and \"consumer\" points of view, although currently the
temporal coverage modules are designed for the latter. There is no
universally acceptable recommendation for describing \"ongoing\" data
within EML. Some groups have chosen to use the \<alternateTimeScale\>
node for the end date, with a value of \"ongoing,\" although this
practice is not endorsed by the EML authors. A better solution could be
to use very general content for the endDate (such as only the current
year) so that the data are accurately described, and searches return
datasets as expected. A future version of EML will accommodate such data
types with coverage elements specific to their needs.

The taxonomic coverage section allows for detailed description of the
taxonomic extent of the dataset or resource. The taxonomic
classification consists of a recursive set of taxon rank names, their
values, and their common names. This construct allows for a taxonomic
hierarchy to be built to show the level of identification (e.g. Rank
Name = Kingdom, Rank Value = Animalia, Common Name = Animals, and so on
down the hierarchy.) The taxonomic coverage module also allows for the
definition of the classification system in cases where alternative
systems are used.

The eml-coverage module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows the coverage extent to be described
once, and then used as a reference in other locations within the EML
document via its ID.

### The eml-project module - Research context information for resources

Links:

- [Module Diagram](./images/eml-project.png)
- [Interactive Module Documentation](./schema/eml-project_xsd.html)

The eml-project module describes the research context in which the
dataset was created, including descriptions of over-all motivations and
goals, funding, personnel, description of the study area etc. This is
also the module to describe the design of the project: the scientific
questions being asked, the architecture of the design, etc. This module
is used to place the dataset that is being documented into its larger
research context.

The eml-project module, like other modules, may be \"referenced\" via
the \<references\> tag. This allows a research project to be described
once, and then used as a reference in other locations within the EML
document via its ID.

### The eml-methods module - Methodological information for resources

Links:

- [Module Diagram](./images/eml-methods.png)
- [Interactive Module Documentation](./schema/eml-methods_xsd.html)

The eml-methods module describes the methods followed in the creation of
the dataset, including description of field, laboratory and processing
steps, sampling methods and units, quality control procedures. The
eml-methods module is used to describe the [*actual*]{.emphasis}
procedures that are used in the creation or the subsequent processing of
a dataset. Likewise, eml-methods is used to describe processes that have
been used to define / improve the quality of a data file, or to identify
potential problems with the data file. Note that the eml-protocol module
is intended to be used to document a [*prescribed*]{.emphasis}
procedure, whereas the eml-method module is used to describe procedures
that [*were actually performed*]{.emphasis}. The distinction is that the
use of the term \"protocol\" is used in the \"prescriptive\" sense, and
the term \"method\" is used in the \"descriptive\" sense. This
distinction allows managers to build a protocol library of well-known,
established protocols (procedures), but also document what procedure was
truly performed in relation to the established protocol. The method may
have diverged from the protocol purposefully, or perhaps incidentally,
but the procedural lineage is still preserved and understandable.
